procedures: Document GitHub Copilot Chat usage (#3097)
eclipse-che/che-docs: modules/end-user-guide/pages/using-github-copilot-chat.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE

> :description: Using GitHub Copilot Chat in a Che workspace

Reviewer: **CQA P8 — Gerund in description metadata**

Update to match the imperative title.

```suggestion
:description: Set up GitHub Copilot Chat in a Che workspace
```

:keywords: copilot, github-copilot, copilot-chat, ai, extensions

> :navtitle: Using GitHub Copilot Chat

Reviewer: **CQA P8, Q3 — Gerund navtitle → imperative**

Procedure titles must use an imperative verb, not a gerund.

```suggestion
:navtitle: Set up GitHub Copilot Chat
```

[id="using-github-copilot-chat"]

> = Using GitHub Copilot Chat

Reviewer: **CQA P8, Q3 — Gerund title → imperative**

CQA 2.1 requires procedure titles to start with an imperative verb. "Using" is a gerund. Since this procedure covers both installation and authentication, "Set up" captures the scope.

```suggestion
= Set up GitHub Copilot Chat
```

> You can use link:https://github.com/features/copilot[GitHub Copilot Chat] in a {prod-short} workspace with the Code - OSS editor by installing the link:https://open-vsx.org/extension/redhat/devspaces-copilot-chat-integration/0.36.2[Dev Spaces Copilot Chat Integration] extension (version 0.36.2) and authenticating with your GitHub account.

Reviewer: **JTBD — WHY-first abstract**

JTBD pattern requires leading with the user's goal (WHY), then the action (HOW). Current text starts with "You can use..." (HOW-first).

```suggestion
To get AI-assisted coding suggestions in your {prod-short} workspace, install the link:https://open-vsx.org/extension/redhat/devspaces-copilot-chat-integration/0.36.2[Dev Spaces Copilot Chat Integration] extension (version 0.36.2) and authenticate with your GitHub account.
```

Also consider defining an attribute for the version (see comment on line 41).

.Prerequisites

* A GitHub account with an active link:https://github.com/features/copilot[GitHub Copilot] subscription.
* A running {prod-short} workspace with the Code - OSS editor.

> * The following URLs must be accessible from the workspace (ensure they are whitelisted if you are in a restricted or air-gapped environment):

Reviewer: **Conscious language violation — "whitelisted"**

Per Red Hat Conscious Language policy, "whitelist/whitelisted" must not be used. Replace with "allowlisted" or restructure.

```suggestion
* The following URLs must be accessible from the workspace (ensure they are added to the allowlist if you are in a restricted or air-gapped environment):
```

+
--
** `https://github.com`
** `https://api.github.com`
** `https://api.githubcopilot.com`
--

.Procedure

. Install version 0.36.2 of the *Dev Spaces Copilot Chat Integration* extension.
+
Choose one of the following options depending on your Open VSX registry configuration:
+
--
* If your {prod-short} instance is configured to use the link:https://open-vsx.org[public Open VSX registry] or a standalone Open VSX registry that contains the extension:
+
Open the Extensions view by pressing kbd:[Ctrl+Shift+X], search for `Dev Spaces Copilot Chat Integration`, select version *0.36.2*, and click *Install*.

* If your {prod-short} instance uses the default embedded Open VSX registry or a registry that does not contain the extension, install it manually from a `.vsix` file:
+
Download the `.vsix` file from the link:https://open-vsx.org/extension/redhat/devspaces-copilot-chat-integration/0.36.2[Open VSX registry], then press kbd:[F1] to open the Command Palette and run `Extensions: Install from VSIX...`.
--
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
Use version 0.36.2 of the extension. Other versions may not be compatible with the current {prod-short} editor.

> ====

Reviewer: **Maintainability — Hardcoded version appears 5 times**

The extension version `0.36.2` is hardcoded in 5 locations across this file. When the version changes, all 5 must be updated. Consider defining an attribute at the top of the file:

```asciidoc
:copilot-ext-ver: 0.36.2
```

Then reference `{copilot-ext-ver}` in prose (note: attributes may not resolve inside raw URL strings, so the link URLs may need to stay hardcoded — but the prose references can use the attribute).

Author: Fixed in c74c9d25b61a5e043f90572d4302c9d21a5ab792

. Authenticate using Device Authentication.
+
Press kbd:[F1] to open the Command Palette, type `GitHub: Device Authentication`, and select the command.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
You must complete Device Authentication *before* attempting to use AI features. Initiating "Sign in to use AI Features" without a valid device authentication token causes authentication errors that require signing out and re-authenticating.

> ====

Reviewer: **CQA Q11 — Admonition density**

Two `[IMPORTANT]` blocks in a 4-step procedure is high density. This is critical sequencing information that belongs in the step narrative, not a separate admonition. Consider folding it into the step 2 text:

```suggestion
IMPORTANT: You must complete Device Authentication *before* attempting to use AI features. Initiating "Sign in to use AI Features" without a valid device authentication token causes authentication errors that require signing out and re-authenticating.
```

Alternatively, merge steps 2 and 3 into a single step with this warning inline, since they are part of the same authentication flow.

. Complete the device authentication flow.
+
A notification appears with a device code. Click the link to open the GitHub device activation page in your browser, paste the code, and authorize access.

. Refresh the browser page.
+
After successful authentication, a notification prompts you to refresh the browser page. Refresh the page to apply the authentication token. Copilot Chat is authenticated automatically and ready to use.

.Verification

> * The Copilot Chat panel opens and responds to prompts.

Reviewer: **CQA Q14 — Thin verification**

Make the verification actionable with a concrete check.

```suggestion
* Open the Copilot Chat panel, type a prompt such as "Explain this file", and verify that a response appears.
```

[NOTE]
====
Device Authentication is a one-time step. The credentials are saved as a Kubernetes object and persist across workspaces on the same cluster.
====

> .Troubleshooting

Reviewer: **Modularity note — Embedded troubleshooting**

For downstream backport, this troubleshooting section should be extracted to a separate module (`ref_troubleshooting-github-copilot-chat.adoc` or similar). For upstream che-docs, embedding is acceptable, but worth keeping in mind for the downstream sync.

Author: So, I don't need to apply this change to the current PR.
Please correct me if I misunderstood your comment.

If you attempted to use Copilot Chat before completing Device Authentication, the extension may enter an error state. Typical symptoms include:

* Copilot Chat appears to be connected but does not respond to prompts.
* The Copilot Chat output log contains errors such as:
+

> ----

Reviewer: **CQA Q18 — Listing block missing source annotation**

Add a source annotation for consistency with CQA code block conventions.

```suggestion
[source,text]
----
```
